---
created: '2025-08-19 18:08:35 UTC'
updated: '2025-08-19 18:09:16 UTC'
---

# How Dutch is the Dutch King?

A few weeks ago, I was reading about prince Bernhard (1911-2004), who is the grandfather of the current Dutch king: King Willem Alexander (born 1967).
Going through Bernhard his history, one can't help but notice that he is very much German.
His name is Bernhard von Lippe-Biesterfeld which means that he is from the Lippe-Biesterfeld family.
Then I went through some other family of the Dutch royals.
King Willem Alexander's father is also German:
Claus-Georg Wilhelm Otto Friedrich von Amsberg (1926-2002).
And the husband of his great grandmother was too: Duke Henry of Mecklenburg-Schwerin (1876-1934).
This region Mecklenburg-Schwerin is where the family of prince Claus was allowed to keep the royal predicate "von".
So it seems that the royals have some strong ties to the Mecklenburg-Schwering area.

Talking about regions, Bernhard von Lippe-Biesterfeld is from the area Lippe and Biesterfeld.
Biesterfelt is within what is now called Lügde.
This lies next to the town of Bad Pyrmont, which is the Northern part of the principality of Waldeck-Pyrmont.
This principality is where Emma von Waldeck-Pyrmont (1858-1934) was from.
She is the mother of queen Wilhelmina (1880-1962).

This was surprising to me, but maybe I just missed something in my primary school education, namely what the word Nassau in the name of the first king of the Netherlands meant.
He is called Willem van Oranje-Nassau (1533-1584).
Nassau was named after the region Nassau-Dillenburg, which lies in Germany too.
Another Nassau is the mother of Emma van Waldeck-Pyrmont called Helena van Nassau (1831-1888).
Another German in the family tree is Wilhelmina von Prussia (1751-1820).

So in summary, basically everyone who got married into the family in the last hundred years was German and the founder was too.
I guess the Dutch king is German.
Now I can't blame the people who called our language _Dutch_ which sounds like _Deutsch_ which means _German_ in German.
In Dutch, we call our own language _Nederlands_, so a correct translation to English should probably have been _Netherlands_.
People from Germany speak German, Poland speak Polish, and from the Netherlands speak... Dutch.
It makes no sense unless you realize that the Dutch royals are actually German, then I'd say it's quite funny.

One final note that is a funny exception to the rule.
The people in the US who speak _Pennsylvania Dutch_ actually speak a mix of American English and **German** not Dutch.

