---
created: '2025-05-07 09:18:14 UTC'
updated: '2025-05-07 09:19:53 UTC'
---

# Publishing a Snap Package

I'm trying to get 'jas: just an installer' published in the snap package registry for a few weeks now. This is how the process is going so far.

According to the docs, I can just register a new snap and publish it.
So in a fresh Ubuntu 24.04, I ran:

```raw
$ sudo apt update

$ sudo apt install neovim

$ sudo snap install snapcraft --classic

$ git clone https://github.com/rikhuijzer/jas.git

$ mv pkg/snapcraft.yaml .

$ snapcraft # installs LXD at first run

$ sudo apt install gnome-keyring

$ snapcraft login

$ snapcraft register jas

$ snapcraft upload --release=edge jas_0.2.0_amd64.snap
Store operation failed:
- resource-not-found: Snap not found for name=jas
Full execution log: '/root/.local/state/snapcraft/log/snapcraft-20250408-093243.551840.log'
```

This is very strange since the register action succeeded. I could also see at <https://dashboard.snapcraft.io/> that the package was registered.

After I ran another registration request via <https://dashboard.snapcraft.io/>, a reviewer politely told me that "jas" was too short:

> Hello,
>
> There is no jas snap registered under your account.
>
> Three-letter and shorter snap names are too generic and don't provide a good idea of what the snap actually is or does. For that reason, we prefer and suggest you select a more descriptive name for your snap (just-an-installer, or jas-installer for example). Keep in mind that even if the snap has one of those names, a command called "jas" can still be provided by the snap using the "alias" functionality, see [1].
>
> Let me know if some of the suggested names are OK with you or if you want to pick a new one; in any case, you can simply register the new name and we will approve it promptly, only 3-letter or shorter names (well and a few other exceptions) require a more in depth manual name review/approval.
>
> 1. https://snapcraft.io/docs/commands-and-aliases
>
> Regards

So I registered `just-an-installer` which then took a few days to be reviewed.

Next, I pushed to `just-an-installer` and it turns out that my tool is now available as

```raw
just-an-installer.jas
```

Maybe I am pedantic, but I think this is quite unwieldy. `just-an-installer` would be okayish, but this is quite long. So I went to the [commands and aliases docs](https://snapcraft.io/docs/commands-and-aliases) that the reviewer suggested.
From the docs:

> As there is no guarantee that an alias is going to be unique, and potential conflicts create a minor inconvenience, a snap’s default aliases are only enabled after a simple public review process.
> [...]
> If you want an alias enabled for your snap, please open a small forum topic [in the store requests category](https://forum.snapcraft.io/c/store-requests) with the details.

So I went to the store and found [an example request](https://forum.snapcraft.io/t/request-alias-for-genio-tools/46686). Here the review took about one way from what I can see.

Next, I set out to make a similar request.
However, when making an account it turns out that I need to be approved by a moderator.

All this shows why I am working on [jas](https://github.com/rikhuijzer/jas) in the first place.
Attempting to register at the snap store has now taken a month already, and it seems that it will take at least another week.
I'm not sure whether jas is the right solution, but I do think that there is a need for reliable, secure, and easy-to-use package managers.

