---
created: '2025-05-19 20:36:52 UTC'
updated: '2025-05-20 05:45:22 UTC'
---

# Yuri Bezmenov: Psychological Warfare Subversion & Control of Western Society

This is the transcript of a [lecture by Yuri Bezmenov](https://youtu.be/5gnpCqsXE8g) (alias Tomas Schuman), a Soviet KGB defector. He "explains in detail his scheme for the KGB process of subversion and takeover of target societies at a lecture in Los Angeles, 1983." The transcript was generated by OpenAI [whisper](https://github.com/openai/whisper) and manually verified and improved:

> Subversion is the term, if you look in a dictionary or criminal code to that
> matter, usually is explained as a part of activity to destroy things like
> religion, government, system, political, economical system of a country. And
> usually it's linked to espionage and such romantic things as blowing up
> bridges, sidetracking trains, cloak and dagger activity in Hollywood style.
> What I'm going to talk about now has absolutely nothing to do with the
> cliche of espionage or KGB activity of collecting information. So the greatest
> mistake or misconception I think is that whenever we are talking
> about KGB for some strange reason, starting from Hollywood movie makers to
> professors of political science and "experts on Soviet affairs"
> or criminologists as they call themselves, they think that the most
> desirable thing for Andropov and the whole KGB is to steal blueprints of some
> supersonic jet, bring it back to Soviet Union and sell it to the Soviet military
> industrial complex.
> This is only partly true.
> If we take the whole time, money
> and manpower that the Soviet Union and KGB in particular spends outside of USSR
> border, we will discover-of course there are no official statistics unlike
> with CIA or FBI-that the espionage as such occupies only 10 to 15 percent of
> money, time and manpower. 15% of the activity of KGB. The rest 85 percent
> is always subversion. And unlike a dictionary of English, Oxford dictionary,
> subversion in Soviet terminology means always a destructive aggressive activity
> aimed to destroy the country, nation or geographical area of your enemy. So
> there's no romantics in there, absolutely. No blowing up bridges, no microfilms in
> Coca-Cola cans, nothing of that sort, no James Bond nonsense. Most of this
> activity is overt, legitimate and easily observable if you give yourself time and
> trouble to observe it. But according to the law and law enforcement systems of
> the Western civilization, it's not a crime because [it's only] misconception and
> manipulation of terms. We think that subverter is a person who is going to
> blow up our beautiful bridges. No, subverter is a student who comes for
> exchange, a diplomat, an actor, an artist, a journalist like myself was ten years
> ago.

> Now subversion is an activity which is a two-way traffic.
> You cannot subvert an enemy which doesn't want to be subverted.
> If you know history of Japan
> for example:
> Before the 20th century Japan was a closed society.
> The moment a foreign boat comes to the shores of Japan, the Imperial Japanese Army
> politely tell them to get lost. And if American salesman comes to the shore of
> Japan, let's say 60 or 70 years back, and says, oh I have a very beautiful
> vacuum cleaner for you, you know, with the good financing. He says, please leave us
> with a medium vacuum cleaner.
> If they don't leave, they shoot them to preserve their culture, ideology, traditions, values intact. You were not
> able to subvert Japan. You cannot subvert Soviet Union because the borders are
> closed. The media is censored by the government. The population is controlled
> by the KGB and internal police. With all the beautiful glossy pictures of Time
> Magazine and Magazine America which is published by the American
> Embassy in Moscow. You cannot subvert Soviet citizens because the magazine
> never reaches Soviet citizens. It's collected from the newsstands and thrown
> to garbage can. Subversion can be only successful when the initiator, the actor,
> the agent of subversion has a responsive target. It's a two-way traffic. United
> States is a receptive target of subversion.
>
> There is no response similar to that one from United States to the Soviet Union.
> It stops halfway somewhere.
> It never reaches here. The theory of subversion goes all the way back two
> thousand five hundred years ago. The first human being who formulated the
> tactics of subversion was a Chinese philosopher by the name of Sun Tze
> 3,500 years BC.
> He was an advisor for several imperial courts in ancient China.
> And he said after long meditation that to implement state
> policy in a warlike manner, it's the most counterproductive, barbaric and
> inefficient to fight on a battlefield.
> You know that war is continuation of
> state policy, right? So if you want successfully to implement your state
> policy and you start fighting this is the most idiotic way to do it. The
> highest arc of warfare is not to fight at all but to subvert anything of value
> in the country of your enemy until such time that the perception of reality of
> your enemy is screwed up to such an extent that he does not perceive you as
> an enemy.
> And that your system, your civilization and your ambitions look
> to your enemy as an alternative if not desirable then at least feasible. Better
> red than dead.
> That's the ultimate purpose, the final stage of subversion
> after which you can simply take your enemy without a single shot being fired
> if the subversion is successful. This is basically what subversion is. As you see
> not a single mentioning of blowing up bridges. Of course Sun Tze didn't know
> about blowing up bridges. Maybe they were not that many bridges at that time but
> the basics of subversion is being taught to every student of KGB school in
> USSR and to officers of military academies. I'm not sure if the same
> author is included in the list of breeding for American officers to say
> nothing about ordinary students of political science. I had difficulty to
> find the translation of Sun Tze in the library of a university in Toronto and
> later on here in Los Angeles. But it's a book which is not available.
> [On the contrary,] it is forced to every student in USSR.
> Every student who is taught to be dealing
> further in his future career with foreigners.
>
> What subversion is.
> Basically it consists of four periods time-wise. If we start from here and go
> this way time right this is the beginning point. The first stage of
> subversion is the process which is called basically demoralization. It says
> for itself what it is.
>
> It takes from say 15 to 20 years to demoralize a society. Why 15 or 20 years?
> This is the time sufficient to educate one generation of students or children.
> One generation, one lifetime span of a person, a human being, which is dedicated
> to study, to shaping up the outlook, ideology, personality. No more, no less.
> Usually it takes from 15 to 20 years. What it includes? It includes influencing by various methods.
> Infiltration, propaganda methods, direct contacts,
> doesn't really matter. I will describe them later. Of various areas where public
> opinion is formulated or shaped, religion, educational system, social life,
> administration, law enforcement system, military, and labor and employer
> relations, and economy.
> Five areas.
>
> Sometimes when I describe all the methods, students ask me a question,
> are you sure this is the result of the Soviet influence? Not necessarily. You see, the tactic
> of subversion, about which I'm talking, is similar to the martial art, the Japanese
> martial art. If some of you are familiar with that tactic, probably you will remember
> that if an enemy is bigger and heavier than yourself, it would be very painful to resist
> his direct strike. If a heavier person wants to strike me in the face, it would be very
> naive and counterproductive to stop his blow. The Chinese and Japanese judo art tells us
> what to do. First to avoid the strike, then to grab the fist and continue his movement
> in the direction where it was before, until the enemy crashes in the wall. You see? So,
> what happens here, the target country, obviously, does something wrong. If it's a free democratic
> society, there are many different movements within the society. There are obviously, in
> every society, there are people who are against the society. There may be simple criminals,
> ideologically in disagreement with the state policy, conscientious enemies, simply psychotic
> personalities who are against anything. And finally, there are a small group of agents
> of a foreign nation, bought, subverted, recruited. The moment all these movements will be directed
> in one direction, right? This is the time to catch that movement and to continue until the
> movement forces the whole society into collapse, into crisis, right? So, that's exactly the martial
> art tactic. We don't stop an enemy. We let him go. We help him to go in the direction we want them
> to go.
>
> So, on the stage of demoralization, obviously, there are tendencies in each society,
> in each country, which are going to opposite direction from the basic moral values and
> principles to take advantage of these movements, to capitalize on them, is the main purpose of the
> originator of subversion. So, we have religion, we have education, we have social life, we have power
> structure, we have labor relations, unions, and finally, we have law and order. One, two, three,
> four, five, six, okay? These are the areas of application of subversion. What it means exactly?
> In case of religion, destroy it, ridicule it, replace it with various sects, cults, which bring
> people's attention, faith, whether it is naive, primitive, doesn't really matter. As long as the
> basically accepted religious dogma is being slowly eroded and taken away from the supreme purpose of
> religion, to keep people in touch with the supreme being, that serves the purpose. Therefore, replace
> it, accept it, respect it, religious organizations with fake organizations, distract people's attention
> from the real faith, and attract them to various different faiths.
>
> Education, distract them from learning something which is constructive, pragmatic, efficient.
> Instead of mathematics, physics,
> foreign languages, chemistry, teach them history of urban warfare, natural food, home economy, your
> sexuality, anything, as long as it takes you away, okay?
>
> Social life, replace traditionally established institutions and organizations with fake organizations,
> take away the initiative from
> people, take away the responsibility from naturally established links between individuals, group of
> individuals, and society at large, and replace them with artificially bureaucratically controlled
> bodies. Instead of social life and friendship between neighbors, establish social workers
> institutions.
> The people who are on payroll of whom? Society? No, bureaucracy.
> The main concern
> of social workers is not your family, not you, not social relations between groups of people. The main
> concern is to get the paycheck from the government. What will be the result of their social work?
> Doesn't really matter. They can develop all kinds of concepts to show them, to show to the government
> and to the people that they're useful. Okay, away from the natural links, power structure.
>
> Okay, the natural bodies of administration, which are traditionally either elected by people at large or
> appointed by elected leaders of society, are being actively substituted by artificial bodies.
> The bodies of people, groups of people, who nobody elected, never, as a matter of fact, most of the
> people don't like them at all, and yet they exist. One of such group is media. Who elected them?
> How come they have so much power, almost monopolistic power on your mind? They can
> rape your mind. But who elected them? How come they have a nerve to decide what is good and
> what is bad for the elected by you, president, and his administration? Who the hell are they?
> Spiro Agnew, who was hated by the liberal left, called them a bunch of enfeebled snobs, and that's
> exactly what they are. They think they know. They don't. The level of mediocrity in a big
> establishment like New York Times, Los Angeles Times, major television network, you don't have
> to be an excellent journalist. You have to be exactly a mediocre journalist. That's easier to
> survive. There's no competition anymore. You have your good, nice income, $100,000 a year. That's it.
> Whether you're better or worse, it doesn't really matter anymore. As soon as you're smiling to the
> camera and do your job, that's it. No more competition. Power structure slowly is eroded
> by the bodies and groups of people who do not have neither qualification nor the will of people
> to keep them in power, and yet they do have power. Okay.
>
> Together with that, there's another process.
> Law enforcement, law and order, organization and structure is being eroded. For the last 20,
> 25 years, if you see old movies and new movies, you can see that in new movies, a policeman,
> an officer of the United States Army, looks dumb, angry, psychotic, paranoid. A criminal looks nice,
> kind of, well, he smokes hash and shoots the whatever, drug, but basically he's a nice human
> being. He's creative, and he's unproductive only because society oppresses him, whereby a general
> of Pentagon is always by definition a dumb, a war maniac.
> A policeman is a pig, rude policeman.
> He abuses his power. No? A generality, generalization like that. The hatred, the mistrust
> to the people who are supposed to protect you and enforce law and order, moral relativity,
> the Angela Buona process lasted two years in Los Angeles, and yet there are still some lawyers who say, look,
> he's a nice character, as a matter of fact. There was some witness who said, also a criminal,
> who said, well, he's a nice guy. I asked him one day to burn a house of my enemy,
> and he wouldn't do it. A nice fellow.
> Erosion, a slow substitution of basic moral principles,
> whereby a criminal is not a criminal, actually. He's a defendant. Even if his guilt is proven,
> there is still a doubt to kill or not to kill, to be or not to be. Thy shall not kill, yes,
> but this line may not necessarily be applicable to a murderer. Thy shall not murder. That should
> be the presumption, not that thy shall not kill.
>
> OK, labor relations. At this stage, within 15 to
> 20 years, we destroy the traditionally established links of bargaining between employer and employee.
> The classical Marxist-Leninist theory of natural exchange of goods.
> A person A has five sacks of grain, and person B has five pairs of shoes.
> And the natural exchange, without money, is when they bargain between each other.
> And only with the introduction of the third, fourth, C, an entirely third foreign stranger,
> who says, no, don't give him five sacks of grain. Give it to me, and you give me your five pairs of
> shoes, and I will distribute it accordingly, so that the economy will go. This is the death
> of natural exchange, death of natural bargaining. Well, trade unions were established 100 years ago.
> The objective was to improve working conditions and to protect the rights of workers from those
> employers who were abusing their right because they had more money. Objectively, at that time,
> initially, the trade union movement did work. What we see now is that the bargaining process
> is no longer resulting in the compromise, which is leading objectively to betterment of working
> conditions and increase of salary. What we see is that after each prolonged strike, the workers
> lose. Even if they have 10 percent increase of their salaries, they cannot catch up due to
> inflation and due to missed time. More than that, millions of people suffer from that strike
> because economy now is interdependent. It's intertwined like one body.
> If previously still workers, say 100 years ago, could strike and nobody would suffer,
> now it's impossible anymore. If a garbage collector strikes today, the rest of the multi-million city
> is stinking. I mean, there's no more service. In Quebec, for example, we had the electricians who
> were on strike. In the middle of winter, you can freeze your bottom, and they still were on strike.
> Did they catch up with the salary? No, they lost. Who benefited? The leaders of trade union.
> What is the motivation for strike? Improving a worker's condition? No, obviously, it's not.
> Then what is it? Ideology. To prove to these capitalists. And the obedient horde of workers,
> like sheep, follow these people, and they cannot disobey. Why? Because if they do,
> you know what happens to them. Pickets. Murders. Shooting truck drivers by picketers. In Montreal,
> for example, I saw with my own eyes, when I was correspondent of CBC, International Canadian
> Broadcasting Corporation, when the workers of aircraft factory destroyed computers and the
> equipment in the factory. And the administration employed strike breakers. Their cars were turned
> upside down and burned. Their houses were burned. Their kids were intimidated, and some victims were
> there. Of that, you can be sure. Why? To improve conditions of workers? No. Ideology.
>
> Okay, so
> this is what happens, basically. It may or may not happen without the help of the Soviet Union,
> but the natural tendencies are being greatly taken advantage of and capitalized by the
> Soviet propaganda systems. How? Whenever trade union strikes, we have influx of propaganda,
> mass media, ideological dissemination. The worker's rights, and we repeat it like parrots. Yes, workers
> write. Who's right? Workers? No. The only freedom of worker to sell his labor, according to his own
> desired will, is taken away from him. By whom? By trade union boss. Unlimited power is given,
> responsibility. I want to sell my labor not for two fifty an hour, but for two dollars. I don't
> have right. My freedom is denied to me. I know that if I sell my work for two dollars an hour,
> not for three dollars an hour, I will compete better with the other guy who is lazy and more
> greedy.
>
> I don't need three dollars. I need only two dollars. No. I was made to believe by media,
> by business, by advertising agencies that I need more and more and more. Have you ever heard any
> advertising on TV to consume less? No. No way. Whether you need a six-cylinder car or not,
> you have to buy it and hurry up. When I was driving here on the local radio station,
> an excited announcer said, you hurry up, rush and save, save, save. There is a plenty houses sale.
> Save by buying more.
> Of course, of course.
>
> It would be too naive to expect that KGB makes that advertising agency
> to do such a crazy commercial. No, of course not. But what we did when I was working for Knowledge
> T. Press, we would snowplow editorial offices, student organizations, religious groups with
> literature of class struggle. If not directly Marxism and his propaganda, then a propaganda of
> a legitimate aspirations of working class, betterment of life, equality, equality, mind you.
> President Kennedy once said, we will make America to believe that people are born equal.
> Are people born equal? Is there any mentioning in the Bible or any other holy scripture in any
> religion, any religion? If you don't believe me, go to library and check it. There is not a single
> word about equality, just the opposite. By your deeds, God will judge you. What you do is important.
> The merit of your personality. You cannot legislate equality if you want to be equal.
> You have to be equal. You have to deserve it.
> And yet we build our society on the principle of equality. We say people are equal. We know it is
> false. It's a lie. Some people are tall and stupid. Others are short, bold and clever.
>
> If we make them equal by force, if we put the principle of equality in the basis of our
> social political structure, it's the same thing as building a house on sand. Sooner or later,
> it will collapse. And that's exactly what happens. And we as Soviet propaganda makers are trying to
> push you in the direction which you go yourself. Equality. Yes, equality. People are equal.
> Land of equal opportunities. Is it true or not? Think about it. Equal opportunities. Should there
> be equal opportunities? For me and for a lazy bastard who comes here from some other country
> and immediately registers as a welfare recipient benefits. I never received a single job. No,
> sorry, I did this once. But I never applied for welfare. For the 13 years, I took any job,
> security guard, journalist, taxi driver, anything.
>
> Well, I was restless, but some people don't like it. So why should we have equal
> opportunities? Why? Equal opportunity to excel. Equal opportunity in equal circumstances. Yes,
> but we know people are different. To excel, yes. Provided we reach the same level of excellency,
> perfection, which is hypothetical distant future. Yes, maybe. But we know perfectly well that
> even with the best intentions, people could not be equal.
>
> Why should we have equality in the, say, legal system? Myself, I'm considering myself a law
> abiding citizen. And the person who comes here to rob and shoot, say, the United States
> Administration under Carter imported thousands of Cuban criminals. They were known criminals,
> yet they were accepted. Do you think it's fair if myself and my wife from Philippines who work like,
> excuse me, horse as a lab technician in the hospital,
> should have the same rights as a criminal from Cuba?
> Why? And yet we repeat as parents, equality, equality, equality. And the Soviet propaganda
> system helps us to believe that equality is something which is desirable. Democracy, as it
> was established by fathers of this country, of this system in the last century, is not equality.
> It's the system where different people, unequal people, have a chance to survive and help each
> other in constant competition, in constant perfection, not inequality, which is superimposed
> from a godfather or a nice person in Washington, D.C. And the absolute equality exists in Soviet
> Union, "equality". Everybody is equally in the dirt, except some people are more
> equal than the others in Politburo. So the moment you bring a country to the point of
> almost total demoralization, when nothing works anymore, when you are not sure if it is right or
> wrong, good and bad, but there's no division between evil and good, when even the leaders of
> church sometimes say, well, violence for the sake of justice, especially social justice, is justified
> in the countries like Nicaragua, El Salvador, well, maybe Rhodesia, and we listen to them and say,
> yeah, probably it's true. Is it true? No, it is not true. Violence is not justified, especially
> for the sake of "social justice" introduced by Marxist-Leninist, that is my former
> colleague from Novosti Press Agency. Okay, so where [were we]?
>
> The next step is destabilization.
> Again, this word says for itself what it is, to destabilize all the relations, all the accepted
> institutions and organizations in a country of your enemy. How you do it? You don't have to send
> a battalion of KGB agents to blow up bridges. No, you let them do it themselves.
> The area of application is, again, it's narrower now, not like the previous case. The overt legitimate
> actions of the KGB in this case would be hardly noticeable. There is no crime if a professor who
> recently went to U.S.S.R. introduces a course of Marxist-Leninism in California in college,
> for example. Nobody is going to come to these doors and say, okay, mister, come,
> you are under arrest. No, it's not a crime. It's not even considered a moral crime against your
> country. So the area of application here is narrowing down to economy, again, labor relations,
> right? To law and order. Plus military. And economy, law and order. Yes, and again, the
> media, but wider scope, little bit different, I'll explain later. Okay, basically, three areas.
>
> Economy. The radicalization of bargaining process. If on that stage
> we still could achieve, theoretically, some positive compromise between the negotiating sides
> with, say, the introduction of arbitrary, it judges the third side, objectively judging the
> demands of both sides. Here it's radicalization. On the stage of destabilization, we cannot come
> to compromise even within a family. The husband and wife couldn't figure out which is better.
> Husband wants his kids to eat at the table, and wife wants him, a child, to roam around the room
> and drop food all over the floor. They cannot come to compromise unless they start a fight.
> It's impossible to reach a compromise, constructive compromise, between neighbors.
> Some people say, I don't like you to work during your lawn at that time, because exactly at that
> time I'm walking my dog and he's getting nervous. He cannot pass his bowels, you know. So they cannot
> compromise. They go to a civil court or something like that. Radicalization of human relations.
> No more compromise. Fight, fight, fight. The normal, traditionally accepted relations are destabilized.
>
> The relations between teachers and students in schools and colleges. Fight.
> The relations in economical sphere, between laborers and employers, are further radicalized.
> No more acceptance of the legitimacy of demands of workers. Unlike Japanese, with the theory Z,
> if you ever heard about it, where the workers are involved in decision-making process, therefore
> they don't have moral incentive to fight their bosses. In the United States, it's just the opposite.
> The harder is the fight, the better. The more heroic they look. When the Greyhound
> network was on strike recently, the correspondents of local TV networks
> all over the United States were approaching the strikers and they say, oh yes, we are doing
> something nice. They look like heroes and they were proud. There was some family. The husband
> was a bus driver. Now they decided in the protest against the bosses to camp somewhere in the forest.
> And they were presented to the audience as a heroic, nice people. You see?
> The violent clashes between passengers, picketers and the strikers are presented as something normal.
> 10, 15, 20 years ago, we would be angry and say, why? Why? Why so much hatred?
> Today we are not. We say, well, common place, radicalization, militarization sometimes.
> As I explained on that stage, I took a step a little bit further. Shooting people.
>
> Okay. Law and order now also is pushed into the area where previously people settled their
> differences peacefully and legitimately. Now we are getting with this court cases in the smallest
> irrelevant cases. We cannot solve our problems anymore. The society at large becomes more and
> more antagonistic between individuals, between groups of individuals and the society at large.
> The media puts himself in the opposition to the society in general, at large,
> separate, alienated. Okay.
>
> On that stage, you remember I was talking a couple of hours ago
> about the sleepers. That's when the students from, say, United States, if they are trained in
> Lumumba University or developing nations that the students I was dealing with, are being sent back
> from the Soviet Union here. Or if they were already in the United States, in the country,
> which is the object of subversion, they spring to action. The sleepers go up.
> They slept for 15 to 20 years. Now they become leaders of groups, preachers,
> I don't know, public figures. Prominently, they actively include themselves in the political
> process. All of a sudden, we see a homosexual. 15 years ago, he did his thing and nobody cared.
> Now he makes it a political issue, a political issue. He demands recognition, respect, human
> rights. And Fierral is a large group of people. And there are violent clashes between him and
> police, his group and ordinary people, no matter what. It's black against white,
> yellows against green. Doesn't matter where his division line goes. As long as this group come
> into antagonistic clash, sometimes militantly, sometimes with firearms, that is the stabilization
> process. The sleepers, many of whom are simply KGB agents, become leaders of the process of
> destabilization. Doesn't mean that comrade Andropov sends comrade Ivanov to the United States.
> The person who takes care is already here. He's a respected citizen of the United States. Sometimes
> he gets money from various foundations for his legitimate struggle for, I don't know, human rights,
> women rights, kid-lived, prison-lived, whatever. There are sympathetic Americans who donate their
> money to him. This stabilization process usually leads directly to the process of crisis.
>
> In case of developing nations, there's the area where I was active. The process starts
> when the legitimate bodies of power, the social structure collapse. It cannot function anymore.
> So instead, we have artificial body injected into society, such as non-elected committees. You
> remember I was talking about them here. Social workers who are not elected by people. Media
> who are self-appointed rulers of your opinion. Some strange groups which claim that they know
> how to lead society forward. They don't usually. All they care is how to collect the nations and
> sell their own concocted ideology, mixture of religion and ideology. Here, we have all this
> artificial body claiming power. If the power is denied to them, they take it by force.
> In case of Iran, for example, all of a sudden we have revolutionary committees. What kind of
> revolution? There was no revolution yet. And yet, they had the committees. They were taking power of
> judgment. They had the power of execution. They had the power of legislation. And they had the
> power of judicial. All of them combined in one person who is half-baked intellectual, sometimes
> graduated from Harvard University or Berkeley. He comes back to his country and he thinks that he
> knows the answer to all the social-economical problems. Okay? Crisis is when society cannot
> function any more productively. It collapses, obviously. That's the word for crisis. So,
> therefore, the population at large is looking for a savior. The religious groups are expecting a
> messiah to come. The workers say, we have family to feed. Let's have a strong government, maybe
> socialist government, centralized, when somebody put their employers on their place and let us
> work. We are sick and tired of going to strike and missing overtime and all that stuff. We need
> some strong man, strong government, a leader, a savior is needed. Population is sick and tired
> already. And here we are. We have a savior. Either a foreign nation comes in or the local
> group of leftists, marxists, no matter what they call themselves, Sandinista, a reverend or some
> sort, Bishop Mozzarella, like in Zimbabwe, doesn't matter. A savior comes and says, I will lead you.
> So we have two alternatives here. Civil war and invasion.
>
> Okay? See how it goes? Civil war, we know what it is. Lebanon is the best example.
> The civil war, which was artificially implanted in Lebanon by injection of force of PLO, Palestinian
> Liberation Organization. Invasion, we have in many other countries like Afghanistan.
> Name any East European country, it was invaded by the Soviet army.
> But the result is the same.
>
> The next stage is normalization.
> Normalization is a very ironic word, of course.
> It is borrowed from 1968 situation in Czechoslovakia. When the Soviet propaganda and
> after the New York Times declared the country is normalized, the tanks moved into Prague,
> so there is no more Prague Spring, there is no more violence, normalization. At that stage,
> the self-appointed rulers of the society don't need any revolution anymore. They don't need any
> radicalism anymore. So this is the reverse from this destabilization. Basically, it is stabilizing
> the country by force. So all the sleepers and activists and social workers and liberals
> and homosexuals and professors and Marxists and Leninists are being eliminated physically
> sometimes. They've done their job already. They are not needed anymore.
> The new rulers need stability to exploit the nation, to exploit the country, to take advantages
> of the victory. So no more revolutionaries, please. And that's exactly what happens in
> a number of countries.
>
> You remember Bangladesh? This is the crisis in which I was instrumental.
> First, they had Mujibur Rahman. In 1971, he was the leader of People's Party,
> Avani League with mustache-like Stalin. He was in Russia many times. In five years,
> he was shot by his former colleagues, Marxists. He fulfilled his function. In Afghanistan,
> it happened three times. Of course, there was Taraki, then there was Amin. Now there's
> Babrakkarmal. They killed each other successively, one after another. The moment he fulfills his
> duty, the first one demoralized country, the second destabilized, the third one brought it to crisis.
> Goodbye, comrades. Babrakkarmal comes from Moscow and put into the seat of power.
> Same thing happened in Grenada recently. Maurice-Bishop? Marxists was killed by Austin,
> what's his name, General, something. It was also a Marxist, right? So no more revolutions, please.
> Normalization now. From now on, no more strikes, no more homosexuals, no more women-led, no more
> kid-led, no more led, period. Good, solid, democratic, proletarian freedom.
>
> Now, to reverse this process takes enormous effort when today the United States had to invade
> Grenada to reverse the process of subversion. Some people say, boy, this is not good,
> it's not kosher, to invade the beautiful country, island of Grenada.
> Well, why didn't you stop the process here when Grenada was just approached by leftists?
> Why not to prevent Maurice-Bishop to come in power in the first place? Did Grenadians want him?
> Very questionable. They didn't know who was Maurice-Bishop in the first place. He came to
> power by coup d'etat himself. Okay? Now we let the situation develop further and further and further
> until the crisis and normalization very soon, and then the United States decided to invade
> country, discovering that the country was absolutely a military base for the Soviet Union.
> Of course, it's a drastic measure. Of course, it's a pity that Marine Corps had to lose, what, 17
> lives. Very bad. Why not to stop the process before it comes to crisis? Oh no intellectuals
> will not let you. It's interference into domestic affairs. They are very careful not to let American
> administration to interfere in domestic affairs of Latin American countries. They don't mind
> Soviet Union interfering in this affair. Okay. So to reverse this process from here, it takes only
> and always military force. No other force on earth can reverse this process at this point.
>
> At this point [the point of crisis, so before normalization], it does not take military invasion of United States Army.
> It takes strong action like in Chile.
> A CIA covert involvement to prevent the savior from outside to come into power
> and to stabilize country before it erupts into civil war.
> Okay. Support. The right-wing conservative forces.
> Buy money. Buy crooks or love doesn't matter. Stabilize the country. Don't let the crisis
> develop into civil war or invasion. Oh no, your liberals will say it's against the law.
> The Congress will not appropriate money for covert actions of CIA. Why not? Should we wait
> till the normalization come and Soviet tanks land in Los Angeles Airport? Now, at that point,
> at the point of destabilization, also the process could be reversed. Again, easily than this. No CIA
> involvement at this point. You know what it takes here? Restriction of some liberties for small
> groups which are self-declared enemies of the society. As simple as that. Oh no, the media and
> liberals will tell you this is against the American Constitution. How can we
> by force deny the civil rights to criminals, for example? It's not good. Okay. So we allow them to,
> okay, if you allow the criminals to have civil rights, go on and bring the country to the crisis.
> This is a bloodless way to do. Curve the rights. I mean, not to put them in prison. No, no. I'm
> not talking about putting all the gays from San Francisco in the concentration camp. Do not allow
> them to take political force. Do not elect them to the seats of power, whether it is municipality
> level, state level, or federal level. It has to be bitten in the heads of American voters,
> that the person like that in the seats of power is an enemy. Do not be afraid of this word. It is
> an enemy. If he is not an enemy here, he will be here. Later on, he will be shot, of course.
> But at this point, he is an enemy. Okay. You are doing great service by denying him a right
> to capitalize on his own crazy ideas and become a powerful man, a man who uses the seat of power.
> Restriction of certain freedoms and permissiveness at that point would prevent
> sliding into crisis and probably will return the process of destabilization. To curb unlimited
> power, monopolistic power of trade unions here at that point would save economy from collapsing,
> to introduce a law to stop private companies of raping public opinions mined in the direction
> of consumerism. No company must have a right to force you into buying more unless you want it.
> There must be a law. You want to advertise your car? Okay. But not a single mentioning of
> buying it now and saving money. It must be against the law to force people to consume more.
> Self-restrain.
>
> Previously, before this process started, the self-restrain was the business of
> church, religion, because our preachers, the fathers of church, would tell us:
> material values are good, but it's not the prime function of human being because you have to live
> with something. Obviously, the design for our life is not to consume more deodorants.
> There must be something greater. If such a complicated instrument as human body was created,
> obviously, there must be some higher purpose for that. And it's very easy to avoid destabilization
> by denying the greedy companies one little freedom, one little liberty, forcing you into
> turning yourself into processors of unwanted products and goods. They turn you into machines,
> like the worm who does inlets and outlets. How long an average appliance lasts these days?
> Less than a year. Why? Where's workmanship? We want you to buy more. Okay.
>
> This stabilization process could be easily overcome if, as I say, the society,
> by its own will or after persuasion by the leaders, will come to the idea of self-restrain.
> It's so hard we want to consume more, but you have to, unless you will come to this stage,
> when, as we say in Russia, if the Sahara desert ever becomes a communist state,
> there will be shortage of sand. So you have to curb your expectations at this point before it's
> too late. But no, we don't want to do it. Demobilization process. Again, it's the easiest
> thing to reverse.
>
> First of all, by restricting import of propaganda, the easiest thing to do,
> unlimited, unrestrained import of Soviet literature, Soviet journalists,
> giving Soviet propaganda and ideological agitators equal time on American TV network.
> It has to be stopped. And it's easy. They won't be offended, mind you. As a matter of fact,
> they will respect America more. But then my former colleague Vladimir Pozner appears on Nightline
> and Ted Kofil asks him, well, Vladimir, what do you think about this? And what can he think?
> He is an instrument of propaganda. He thinks what comrade Andropov tells him to think.
> He has just a nice, articulate mouthpiece of the Soviet subversion system.
> And Ted Kofil makes you believe that my friend Vladimir Pozner thinks.
>
> The process of demoralization may not have started at all if at that point
> the country, which is a recipient of subversion, actively, not violently, but actively prevents
> importation of foreign ideology. I don't want America to follow the pattern of ancient Japan.
> You don't have to shoot every foreigner when it approaches the sacred borders of the United States.
> But when he offers you a junk in the disguise of very shiny something,
> you have to tell him: No, we have our own junk.
>
> If at that point the society is strong, brave, and conscientious enough
> to stop importation of ideas which are foreign, then the whole chain of events could be prevented.
>
> Recently I've been to the Philippines and I was shocked how in big cities like Manila,
> children listen to deafening music. A melodious nation with long traditions of good, nice,
> ethnic music introduced by Spanish a long time ago, maybe two centuries, three centuries ago.
> All of a sudden listen to musical garbage blasting their radios at full volume. Why?
> In India I spent many years watching the reactions of Indians walking out of movie theaters
> after seeing Hollywood production. They couldn't figure out why Americans are so wasteful. They
> smash their cars, their shiny cars, every five minutes. How come they shoot each other for half
> million dollars? Is it true that they are so obsessed with sex? Can you imagine showing a movie
> where each five minutes there's a copulation on the screen to a country like India with
> long traditions, tradition of respect to this private matter, or to Pakistan?
> And the United States expects these people to respect you? No way. Oh yes, they will see the
> movie. They'll pay five rupees to see that garbage, but they walk out and will tell their kids:
> don't respect Americans, don't be like Americans.
>
> So the process of demoralization
> could be stopped right here, both as an expert and as an import. And that takes one step, one
> very important thing to do. You don't have to expel all the KGB agents from Washington DC.
> The most difficult and at the same time the simplest answer to the subversion is to start
> it here and even before. By bringing back the society to religion, something that you cannot
> touch and eat and put on yourself, but something that rules society and makes it move and preserve
> it. A Soviet scientist Shafarevich, who has nothing to do with religion, he is a computer scientist,
> did a very intensive research on the history of socialist countries. He calls socialist or
> communist any country with a centralized economy and the pyramidal style of power structure.
> And he discovered, actually he didn't discover it, he just brought to attention of his readers,
> that civilizations like Mahanjodaro in the river Hindu's area, like Egypt, like Maya, Incas,
> like Babylonian culture, collapsed and disappeared from the surface of earth.
> The moment they lost religion, as simple as that, they disintegrated. Nobody remembers
> about them anymore. Well, distantly. So the ideas are moving society and keeping mankind
> as a society of human beings, intelligent, moral agents of God.
>
> The facts, the truth, the exact knowledge may not. All the sophisticated technology and computers
> will not prevent society from disintegrating and eventually dying out. Have you ever met
> a person who would sacrifice his life, freedom, for the truth like that? This is truth. I never
> met a person who said, this is truth and I'm ready to shoot me. To defend the truth. Right?
> But millions sacrifice their life, freedom, comfort, everything for things like God.
> like Jesus Christ. It's an honor. Some martyrs in the Soviet concentration camp died.
> And they died in peace, unlike those who shouted long live Stalin, knowing perfectly well that
> he may not live long. Something which is not material moves society and helps it to survive.
> And the other way around, the moment we turn into two by two is four
> and make it a guiding principle of our life, our existence. We die. Even though this is true,
> and this we cannot prove, when we can feel and have faith in it.
>
> So the answer to ideological
> subversion, strangely enough, is very simple. You don't have to shoot people. You don't have
> to aim missiles and Pershing's and Cruz missiles at Andropov's headquarters.
> You simply have to have faith and prevent subversion. In other words, not to be a victim
> of subversion. Don't try to be a person who in Zudor is trying to smash your enemy and being
> caught by your hand. Don't strike like that. Strike with the power of your spirit and moral
> superiority. If you don't have that power, it's high time to develop it. And that's the only answer.
> Thank you.

