---
created: '2025-08-12 21:20:31 UTC'
updated: '2025-08-12 21:22:16 UTC'
---

# The Social Media Good, Bad, and Ugly

Recently, I had some realizations about social media that I think go to the core of the issue.

First of all, of course social media is not all bad. It can be really nice for example to find experts who discuss the news such as the blancolirio channel on YouTube, which is a channel by an experienced pilot discussing aviation crashes and mishaps and what to learn from it to avoid similar accidents in the future.

What’s bad about social media is that it’s fake social. You usually don’t make real friends and if you do it could usually be done faster in real life. For example, if you have spent 100 hours hanging around at someone’s social media posts. What is the chance that this person will water your plans when you go on vacation? What if you would have spent 100 hours in real-life with this person?

The ugly is the algorithm. I recently had some realizations about things which caused me to look up different topics on social media which in turn caused the algorithm to give me different suggestions. What I noticed is how little the algorithm makes suggestions outside of your bubble. So it might feel like you are finding new information from new creators and you might think that you are expanding your bubble. In reality, however, you are just exploring deeper and deeper inside the bubble that you are in. Only when you yourself change, will the algorithm flip over to another bubble. Normal media like CNN or Fox have this bubble problem too of course. You can get sucked into it more and more.

But this is not even the ugliest part. The ugliest part is that most of our media primarily pushes fear-based narratives. And even worse, your personal social media pushes **exactly** those messages that scare you the most because the algorithm is tailored to you (or at least the bubble that you care most about).

I’ll also provide a solution after these negatives. It’s easy: put the phone away and go do something else like a walk outside. You won’t miss anything on the social media. If the world is ending tomorrow, what can you do about it? I just hope that if the world ever ends, that I do not waste my last day on social media.

